# AGV Special General Meeting 2024

## Information and Links
- [RSVP for the conference here](https://contact-vic.greens.org.au/civicrm/event/register?reset=1&id=14800)
- [General Greenhouse Page](https://members.greens.org.au/node/13588)
- [Conference Agenda](https://members.greens.org.au/system/files/Draft%20Agenda%20-%20GM%20-%20Sunday%203%20March%202024.pdf)
- Time/Date: March 3rd, 2024, 10am.
- Location: A zoom meeting (link will be sent on RSVP), or
- In-person: Community Hub at The Dock Level 1 912 Collins Street
DOCKLANDS VIC 3008

## Special Resolution Voting Guide

This guide has been prepared by a member who has analysed the resolutions through the lens of the

AGV Four Pillars and principles of good governance.

This is subjective analysis. Members are encouraged to conduct their own analysis and seek further opinions.

If you believe there are factual errors within this document,
Please email, <anneke.nehring@vic.greens.org.au>

## Voting Guide Quick Reference

| SR # | Analysis | Recommendation |
|------|----------|----------------|
| 1 | Lowers membership length requirement for voting in pre-selections from 12 months to 3 months This resolution allows greater enfranchisement for interested members. Supports participatory democracy and social justice. Disenfranchisement is more likely to affect young, low-income or otherwise marginalised members. | SUPPORT ✓ |
| 2 | Removes the Election Deliberation Session (EDS) attendance requirement for eligibility to vote in State Council elections. Over 50% of the membership was ineligible to vote in the 2023 State Council election as a result of not having attended an EDS. Allows greater enfranchisement for members who may not have time or ability to attend an EDS due to work, caring, cultural responsibilities or illness. Supports participatory democracy and social justice. | SUPPORT ✓ |
| 3 | Lowers membership length requirement for voting in State Council elections from 12 months to 3 months. This resolution allows greater enfranchisement for interested members. As in SR1 above, supports participatory democracy and social justice. | SUPPORT ✓ |
| 4 | Removes membership length requirement for running for State Council elections. As above, supports participatory democracy and social justice. | SUPPORT ✓ |
| 5 | Lowers membership length requirement for running for State Council elections from 2 years to 12 months. As above, supports participatory democracy and social justice. Note: will only be considered if SR4 fails. | SUPPORT ✓ |

## SR1: Preselection voting rights
That Schedule 8, item 2 of the Constitution be amended to replace the words ‘last year’ with ‘last three months’.

### Analysis:

Lowers membership length requirement for voting in pre-selections from 12 months to 3 months This resolution allows greater enfranchisement for interested members. Supports participatory democracy and social justice. Disenfranchisement is more likely to affect young, low-income or otherwise marginalised members.

**Recommendation: SUPPORT ✓**

## SR2: State Council Election Deliberation Sessions

That:
1. Schedule 8, item 3 of the Constitution be amended to read as follows:
‘A member is eligible to vote in a State Council election if, when the roll of voters is closed, they have been a member of the Party or
another Greens party for the last year.’
2. Clause 25(3) of the Constitution be amended to read as follows:
‘The Committee may:
    1. assist branches to understand how to make a joint branch proposal;
    2. make information and statistics about State Council elections and members’ plebiscites available to members; and
    3. request the assistance of any person or party body.’

### Analysis:

- Clause 1 removes the Election Deliberation Session attendance requirement for eligibility to vote in State Council elections. Over 50% of the membership was ineligible to vote in the 2023 State Council election as a result of not having attended an EDS.
- Clause 2 removes a power of the Constitutional Votes Committee that would be made redundant by removing the EDS requirements. Allows greater enfranchisement for members who may not have time or ability to attend an EDS due to work, caring, cultural responsibilities or illness. Supports participatory democracy and social justice.

**Recommendation: SUPPORT ✓**

## SR3: State Council Election voting rights

That Schedule 8, item 3 be amended to replace the words ‘last year’ with ‘last three months’.

### Analysis

Lowers membership length requirement for voting in State Council elections from 12
months to 3 months This resolution allows greater enfranchisement for interested
members. Supports participatory democracy and social justice. Disenfranchisement is
more likely to affect young, low-income or otherwise marginalised members.

**Recommendation: SUPPORT ✓**

## SR4 & 5: State Council eligibility

### Special Resolution 4:

That Schedule 8, item 4(2) of the Constitution be amended to read as follows: ‘A member is eligible for election as a State Councillor if they live in Victoria.’ 

#### Analysis

Removes membership length requirement for running for State Council elections. Maximises the potential pool of candidates for State Council and other internal positions. Supports grassroots democracy and social justice.

**Recommendation: SUPPORT ✓**

### Special Resolution 5 (will only be considered if Special Resolution 4 fails):

That Schedule 8, item 4(2)(a) of the Constitution be amended to replace the words ‘last two years’ with ‘last year’. 

#### Analysis

Lowers membership length requirement for running for State Council elections from 2 years to 1 year. Increases the potential pool of candidates for State Council and other internal positions. Supports grassroots democracy and social justice.

**Recommendation: SUPPORT ✓**

## Frequently Asked Questions

### General: Weren’t these all voted down in the last AGM?

More than two thirds of members present at the AGM voted in favour of enfranchisement in some way, despite the fact that it was an all-day meeting. Some newer members did not attend, on the assumption that they also couldn’t vote in the AGM.

### SR1&SR3: Why three months? Why not zero months?

Three months appears to be the best compromise position to maximise enfranchisement in the short term while satisfying members who are concerned about branch stacking.

### SR2: If Election Deliberation Sessions aren’t compulsory, how will we ensure voters are informed?

The requirement to attend an EDS essentially worked as a voter suppression mechanism in the 2023 State Council elections.

Of the 3809 total members during that election:
- 2740 members (72% of all members) satisfied the 1 year membership requirement.
- Only 671 members (17% of all members; 25% of 1y+ members) attended an EDS
- 537 members (14% of all members; 19% of 1y+ members) voted.

Members can be informed in all sorts of ways. Enfranchisement can only strengthen our democracy.

### SR4&5: Won’t removing/reducing eligibility requirements risk unqualified people being elected to State Council?

Membership length is not a reliable proxy for skills, experience, or even dedication to the Party. It is poor governance to arbitrarily prevent newer members who are qualified from throwing their hat into the ring.

Candidates will still need to convince members to vote for them. They will need other members to write statements to endorse them.

State Council are having difficulties filling roles on key internal committees due to eligibility requirements tied to SC eligibility.

We need to ensure that as many people as possible are engaged and empowered internally to make our governance more resilient.